Quantitative Methods in Ecology and Evolution
---------------------------------------------

### Course outline

-   [ Course outline](Outline "wikilink")

### Calendar description

This course focuses on realistic quantitative modeling of lab and field
data.  The main activity is learning to fit models to data using a
statistical package and programming language called R. In this applied
context, the course will visit a variety of philosophical topics:
parsimony vs. realism, Bayesian vs. frequentist statistics, estimation
vs. hypothesis testing. The course will enhance your ability to ask
interesting biological questions with a quantitative flavor; and to
construct, parameterize, and test models for your own data.

### CONTENT/RATIONALE

The course will provide students with practical, data-oriented tools for
quantitative analysis.  Major topics will include: data exploration;
basics of mathematical models in biology; basics of statistical models
in biology; stochastic simulations; randomization techniques; and
likelihood methods.

Faculty
-------

-   [Jonathan
    Dushoff](http://bio.mcmaster.ca/faculty/dushoff/dushoff.htm)
-   [Ben Bolker](http://www.math.mcmaster.ca/~bolker/)
-   [Course email address](mailto:bio708qmee@gmail.com)

Meeting time and place
----------------------

**provisional**

-   Wednesdays 1:30-?? in LSB B130A
    -   We will usually aim to lecture for 50 minutes, but may or may
        not stick around for informal sessions afterwards.

<!-- -->

-   Fridays 12:30-1:20 in JHE 329

Assignments
-----------

For the first few weeks of the course, there will be a short assignment
every week. You are advised to start on these on Wednesday (whether
we've said exactly what the assignment is by then or not). We will
typically work on them or talk about them in class on Friday They are
technically due Monday at noon. This is to encourage you to finish
quickly if you can, and move on with your life, not to give you
pressure. We will try to look at them by Tuesday night. If yours is not
in by the time we finish reading the assignments, there may be a delay
in getting it back to you. If you want to hand in your assignment after
noon on Wed, talk to us about this first.

Please submit your assignment by email to <bio708qmee@gmail.com>.

### Final project

Your final project is due on Wed 22 April at noon. You should discuss
and perform a group of statistical analyses. You don't need to write a
formal paper, and you may submit on the wiki. But you should present
both the scientific and statistical background clearly. Discuss what
choices you made, and if necessary what further statistical steps you
should take in the future. The final project is worth two ordinary
assignments.
